<!DOCTYPE book PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DocBook XML V4.2//EN"
              "http://www.oasis-open.org/docbook/xml/4.2/docbookx.dtd"
              [<!ENTITY mdash "&#8212;">]>
<!--
 - Copyright (C) 2009-2010  Internet Systems Consortium, Inc. ("ISC")
 - 
 - Permission to use, copy, modify, and/or distribute this software for any
 - purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
 - copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
 - 
 - THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND ISC DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES WITH
 - REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY
 - AND FITNESS.  IN NO EVENT SHALL ISC BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT,
 - INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM
 - LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE
 - OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR
 - PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
-->

<!-- File:  $Id: aftr.conf.docbook 1001 2010-11-30 18:56:00Z pselkirk $ -->
<refentry>
  <refentryinfo>
     <date>Jan 14, 2010</date>
  </refentryinfo>

  <refmeta>
    <refentrytitle><filename>aftr.conf</filename></refentrytitle>
    <manvolnum>5</manvolnum>
    <refmiscinfo>AFTR</refmiscinfo>
  </refmeta>

  <refnamediv>
    <refname><filename>aftr.conf</filename></refname>
    <refpurpose>configuration file for aftr</refpurpose>
  </refnamediv>

  <docinfo>
    <copyright>
      <year>2009</year>
      <year>2010</year>
      <holder>Internet Systems Consortium, Inc. ("ISC")</holder>
    </copyright>
  </docinfo>

  <refsynopsisdiv>
    <cmdsynopsis>
      <command>aftr.conf</command>
    </cmdsynopsis>
  </refsynopsisdiv>

  <refsect1>
    <title>DESCRIPTION</title>
    <para>
      The <command>aftr</command> daemon requires a configuration file.
      By default it is named <filename>aftr.conf</filename>, and is
      located in <varname>$src_path</varname>.
      The <varname>AFTRCONFIG</varname> environment
      variable and the <option>-c</option> argument give an alternate path.
      Sample configuration files are provided in
      <filename>$src_path/conf/aftr.conf</filename> (OS independent).
    </para>
    <para>
      The configuration file consists of a set of one-line configuration
      commands.  Commands are not case sensitive.  Any line beginning with '#'
      or whitespace is ignored as a comment.
    </para>
    <para>
      Configuration and interactive commands belong to sections:
      <itemizedlist>
        <listitem>
        <para>
          section zero is for global parameters which must be defined before
          anything else when they are not kept to their default values,
          for instance <command>defmtu</command>.
        </para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
        <para>
          section one is for required parameters, for instance
          <command>acl6</command>.
        </para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
        <para>
          section two is for reloadable parameters, for instance
          <command>nat</command>.
        </para>
        </listitem>
        <listitem>
        <para>
          interactive only commands are in the section three.
        </para>
        </listitem>
      </itemizedlist>
    </para>
    <para>
      Only the section one commands are required; reasonable defaults are
      provided for all other configuration parameters.  See
      <filename>conf/aftr.conf</filename> for an example of a minimal
      configuration file.
    </para>
  </refsect1>

  <refsect1>
    <title>GLOBAL CONFIGURATION COMMANDS</title>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
        <term><command>autotunnel on|off</command></term>
        <listitem>
        <para>
          Alias of <userinput>default tunnel auto on|off</userinput>.
        </para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>

      <varlistentry>
        <term><command>bucket tcp|udp|icmp size <replaceable>size</replaceable></command></term>
        <listitem>
        <para>
          Specifies the bucket size. Compile time options are
          <varname>[TCP|UDP|ICMP]BUCKSZ</varname>,
          default values are: <varname>TCPBUCKSZ</varname> 10,
          <varname>UDPBUCKSZ</varname> 8, <varname>ICMPBUCKSZ</varname> 3.
          Minimum is 0 (excluded) and maximum 255.
        </para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>

      <varlistentry>
        <term><command>decay 1|5|15 <replaceable>decay</replaceable></command></term>
        <listitem>
        <para>
          Specifies decay values for 1, 5 and 15 mn rates. Compile time
          options are <varname>DECAY{1,5,15}</varname>, default values are:
          <varname>DECAY1</varname> exp(-1/60), <varname>DECAY5</varname>
          exp(-1/300), <varname>DECAY15</varname> exp(-1/900).
          Minimum is 0.0 and maximum 1.0.
        </para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>

      <varlistentry>
        <term><command>default fragment equal on|off</command></term>
        <listitem>
        <para>
          Enables or disables equalizing the length of IPv6 fragments.
          Default is off.
        </para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>

      <varlistentry>
        <term><command>default fragment lifetime <replaceable>lifetime</replaceable></command></term>
        <listitem>
        <para>
          Specifies the lifetime of fragments in reassembly queues. Compile
          time option is <varname>FRAG_LIFETIME</varname>, default value is
          30 seconds.
          Minimum is 0 (excluded) and maximum 1200.
        </para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>

      <varlistentry>
        <term><command>default fragment ipv6|in|out maxcount <replaceable>maxcount</replaceable></command></term>
        <listitem>
        <para>
          Maximum number of entries in reassembly queues ('in' is IPv4 from
          clients to the Internet, 'out' is IPv4 from the Internet to clients).
          Compile time options are <varname>FRAG{6,IN,OUT}_MAXCNT</varname>,
          default values are 1024. Minimum is 0 (included so it is possible to
          disable reassembly), maximum is 16535.
        </para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>

      <varlistentry>
        <term><command>default hold lifetime <replaceable>lifetime</replaceable></command></term>
        <listitem>
        <para>
          Specifies the lifetime of expired NAT entries in the hold queue.
          Compile time option is <varname>HOLD_LIFETIME</varname>, default
          value is 120 seconds. Minimum is 0 (included), maximum is 600.
        </para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>

      <varlistentry>
        <term><command>default nat lifetime tcp|closed|udp|icmp|retrans <replaceable>lifetime</replaceable></command></term>
        <listitem>
        <para>
          Specifies the lifetime of dynamic NAT entries ('closed' is for closed
          TCP sessions, 'retrans' is used for response not yet received).
          Compile time options are
          <varname>[TCP|CLOSED_TCP|UDP|ICMP|RETRANS]_LIFETIME</varname>,
          default values are TCP (600), closed TCP (120, aka 2*MSL), UDP (300),
          ICMP (30), retrans (10). Minimum is 0 (excluded), maximum 36000
          (10 hours).
        </para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>

      <varlistentry>
        <term><command>default pool tcp|udp|echo <replaceable>min</replaceable>-<replaceable>max</replaceable></command></term>
        <listitem>
        <para>
          Specifies the default port (or id for icmp echo) ranges for pools.
          Compile time options are <varname>[TCP|UDP]_[MIN|MAX]PORT</varname>,
          <varname>ICMP_[MIN|MAX]ID</varname>, default values are
          <varname>TCP_MINPORT</varname> 2048, <varname>UDP_MINPORT</varname>
          512, <varname>ICMP_MINID</varname> 0, <varname>TCP_MAXPORT</varname>
          65535, <varname>UDP_MAXPORT</varname> 65535,
          <varname>ICMP_MAXID</varname> 65535.
          Minimum is 1 (0 for ICMP), maximum 63535. 
        </para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>

      <varlistentry>
        <term><command>default private <replaceable>IPv4_prefix</replaceable>/<replaceable>prefix_length</replaceable></command></term>
        <listitem>
        <para>
	  Add a private prefix to IPv4 ACLs. The default is RFC 1918 prefixes
	  and the 192.0.0.0/29 from the ds-lite draft.
         </para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>

      <varlistentry>
        <term><command>default tunnel auto on|off</command></term>
        <listitem>
        <para>
          Enables or disables on-the-fly tunnel creation.  Default is on.
        </para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>

      <varlistentry>
        <term><command>default tunnel mss on|off</command></term>
        <listitem>
        <para>
          This enables or disables TCP MSS patching on packets going from and
          to tunnels.  Can be overridden by per-tunnel configuration.  If any
          tunnels are explicitly configured, this must be specified before
          them.  Default is off.
        </para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>

      <varlistentry>
        <term><command>default tunnel mtu <replaceable>mtu</replaceable></command></term>
        <listitem>
        <para>
          Specifies <replaceable>mtu</replaceable> as the default IPv6 MTU of
          tunnels. Can be overridden by per-tunnel configuration.
        </para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>

      <varlistentry>
        <term><command>default tunnel toobig on|off|strict</command></term>
        <listitem>
        <para>
          This specifies the policy for packets from the Internet
          which are too big (i.e., they don't fit in one IPv6
          encapsulating packet) and are marked as <quote>don't
          fragment</quote>. 'On' means a ICMPv4 packet too big error
          is returned to the source, 'off' the packet just go through,
          and 'strict' the packet is dropped with a ICMPv4
          error. Default is on (i.e., the packet is encapsulated into
          some IPv6 fragments and a ICMP error is returned for path
          MTU determination).
        </para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>

      <varlistentry>
        <term><command>default tunnel fragment ipv6|ipv4 maxcount <replaceable>maxcount</replaceable></command></term>
        <listitem>
        <para>
          Specifies the maximum number of reassembly queue entries per tunnel.
          Compile time options are <varname>FRAGTN[46]_MAXCNT</varname>,
          default values are  <varname>FRAGTN6_MAXCNT</varname> 16,
          <varname>FRAGTN4_MAXCNT</varname> 64. Mininum is 0 (included for
          reassembly disable), maximum is 255.
        </para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>

      <varlistentry>
        <term><command>default tunnel nat tcp|udp|icmp maxcount <replaceable>maxcount</replaceable></command></term>
        <listitem>
        <para>
          Specifies the maximum number of NAT entries per tunnel. Compile time
          options are <varname>[TCP|UDP|ICMP]_MAXTNATCNT</varname>, default
          values are <varname>TCP_MAXNATCNT</varname> 2000,
          <varname>UDP_MAXNATCNT</varname> 200,
          <varname>ICMP_MAXNATCNT</varname> 50.
          Minimum is 0 (included), maximum is 65535.
        </para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>

      <varlistentry>
        <term><command>default tunnel nat tcp|udp|icmp rate <replaceable>limit</replaceable></command></term>
        <listitem>
        <para>
          Specifies the maximum rate of dynamic NAT creation per second.
          Compile time options are <varname>[TCP|UDP|ICMP]_MAXTNATRT</varname>,
          default values are <varname>TCP_MAXNATRT</varname> 50,
          <varname>UDP_MAXNATRT</varname> 20,
          <varname>ICMP_MAXNATRT</varname> 5.
          Minimum is 0 (included), maximum 255.
        </para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>

      <varlistentry>
        <term><command>delete private<replaceable>IPv4_address</replaceable></command></term>
        <listitem>
        <para>
          This removes the IPv4 private prefix with the IPv4 address.
	  It is an error to have no private prefixes.
        </para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>

      <varlistentry>
        <term><command>defmss on|off</command></term>
        <listitem>
        <para>
          Alias of <userinput>default tunnel mss on|off</userinput>.
        </para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>

      <varlistentry>
        <term><command>defmtu <replaceable>mtu</replaceable></command></term>
        <listitem>
        <para>
          Alias of <userinput>default tunnel mtu
            <replaceable>mtu</replaceable></userinput>.
        </para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>

      <varlistentry>
        <term><command>deftoobig on|off|strict</command></term>
        <listitem>
        <para>
          Alias of <userinput>default tunnel toobig on|off|strict</userinput>.
        </para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>

      <varlistentry>
        <term><command>eqfrag on|off</command></term>
        <listitem>
        <para>
          Alias of <userinput>default fragment equal on|off</userinput>.
        </para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>

      <varlistentry>
        <term><command>quantum <replaceable>quantum</replaceable></command></term>
        <listitem>
        <para>
          Specifies the number of packets dealt with in one main loop round
          (i.e., the size of a slice of work). Compile time option is
          <varname>QUANTUM</varname>, default value is 20. Minimum is
          2 (included), maximum is 255.
        </para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
  </refsect1>

  <refsect1>
    <title>REQUIRED CONFIGURATION COMMANDS</title>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
        <term><command>address endpoint <replaceable>IPv6_address</replaceable></command></term>
        <listitem>
        <para>
          <replaceable>IPv6_address</replaceable> is the AFTR endpoint
          address of the Softwire tunnels.
          If the DHCPv6 ds-lite option is used, this address must match the
          advertised address.
        </para>
        <para>
          It is a required command: it  absolutely must be present in the
          <filename>aftr.conf</filename> file; the <command>aftr</command>
          daemon will not start without it.
        </para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>

      <varlistentry>
        <term><command>address icmp <replaceable>IPv4_address</replaceable></command></term>
        <listitem>
        <para>
          <replaceable>IPv4_address</replaceable> is a global IPv4 address
          used as the source for ICMP errors sent back to the Internet (i.e.,
          the ICMPv4 errors will look like returned from an intermediate
          router that has this address). It is a required command.
        </para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>

      <varlistentry>
        <term><command>pool <replaceable>IPv4_address</replaceable> <optional>tcp|udp|echo <replaceable>min</replaceable>-<replaceable>max</replaceable></optional></command></term>
        <listitem>
        <para>
          This specifies a global IPv4 address that will be used as the source
          address of NAT'ed packets sent to the Internet.  Multiple global
          addresses can be specified, at least one is required.
        </para>
        <para>
          The optional part limits the port (or id) range used for the protocol
          with the global IPv4 address in dynamical bindings (i.e., not static
          or A+P bindings which can use the reserved ports outside the range).
        </para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>

      <varlistentry>
        <term><command>acl6 <replaceable>IPv6_prefix</replaceable>/<replaceable>prefix_length</replaceable></command></term>
        <listitem>
        <para>
          This adds an (accept) entry in the IPv6 ACL. Note for a regular
          IPv6 packet the ACL is checked only when no tunnel was found,
          and the default is <quote>deny all</quote>, so at least one acl6
          entry in the configuration file is required.
        </para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
  </refsect1>

  <refsect1>
    <title>RELOADABLE CONFIGURATION COMMANDS</title>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
        <term><command>tunnel <replaceable>IPv6_remote</replaceable> <optional><replaceable>IPv4_src</replaceable></optional></command></term>
        <listitem>
        <para>
          This specifies an IPv4-in-IPv6 tunnel configuration.
          <replaceable>IPv6_remote</replaceable> is the remote (ds-lite
          client) IPv6 address of the tunnel. Either the tunnel is associated
          with a source address in a round robin way or it is associated to
          the specified <replaceable>IPv4_src</replaceable>.
        </para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>

      <varlistentry>
        <term><command>nat <replaceable>IPv6_remote</replaceable> tcp|udp <replaceable>IPv4_src</replaceable> <replaceable>port_src</replaceable> <replaceable>IPv4_new</replaceable> <replaceable>port_new</replaceable></command></term>
        <listitem>
        <para>
          This defines a static binding/NAT entry for the client
          behind the tunnel at <replaceable>IPv6_remote</replaceable>.
          <replaceable>*_src</replaceable> are the source IPv4 address
          and port at the tunnel side of the NAT,
          <replaceable>*_new</replaceable> are the source IPv4 address
          and port at the Internet side of the NAT.
          <replaceable>IPv4_new</replaceable> should be a reserved source
          NAT address, <replaceable>port_new</replaceable> must not be inside
          a dynamic port range.
        </para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>

      <varlistentry>
        <term><command>prr <replaceable>IPv6_remote</replaceable> tcp|udp <replaceable>IPv4</replaceable> <replaceable>port</replaceable></command></term>
        <listitem>
        <para>
          This defines a Port-Range Router/A+P null NAT entry for the
          client behind the tunnel at <replaceable>IPv6_remote</replaceable>.
          <replaceable>IPv4</replaceable> and <replaceable>port</replaceable>
          are the source IPv4 address and  port at the tunnel side of the NAT.
          They stay unchanged both ways: this entry is used to check
          authorization and perform port routing.
        </para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>

      <varlistentry>
        <term><command>nonat <replaceable>IPv6_remote</replaceable> <replaceable>IPv4</replaceable>/<replaceable>prefix_length</replaceable></command></term>
        <listitem>
        <para>
          This defines a No-NAT tunnel for the client behind the tunnel at
          <replaceable>IPv6_remote</replaceable> and the prefix
          <replaceable>IPv4</replaceable>/<replaceable>prefix_length</replaceable>.
          No translation is performed for matching packets.
        </para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>

      <varlistentry>
        <term><command>mss <replaceable>IPv6_remote</replaceable> on|off</command></term>
        <listitem>
        <para>
          This enables or disables TCP MSS patching on packets going
          from and to the tunnel of <replaceable>IPv6_remote</replaceable>.
          Default is off.
        </para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>

      <varlistentry>
        <term><command>mtu <replaceable>IPv6_remote</replaceable> <replaceable>mtu</replaceable></command></term>
        <listitem>
        <para>
          This changes the IPv6 MTU of the tunnel of
          <replaceable>IPv6_remote</replaceable> to
          <replaceable>mtu</replaceable>.
        </para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>

      <varlistentry>
        <term><command>toobig <replaceable>IPv6_remote</replaceable> on|off|strict</command></term>
        <listitem>
        <para>
          Per-tunnel configuration of the too big policy.
        </para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>

      <varlistentry>
        <term><command>debug set <optional><replaceable>level</replaceable></optional></command></term>
        <listitem>
        <para>
          Specifies the debug level.  Default is 0.  If set to non 0,
          verbose log messages will be dumped to stderr.  The higher the level
          is, the noiser the logs are.  At present, the meaningful levels are
          1 (log tunnel creation), 3 (log packet reads and writes), and 10
          (function entry tracing).  If the level is omitted, it is set to 1.
        </para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>

      <varlistentry>
        <term><command>try tunnel <replaceable>IPv6_remote</replaceable> <optional><replaceable>IPv4_src</replaceable></optional></command></term>
        <listitem>
        <para>
	  Create when it doesn't already exist an IPv4-in-IPv6 tunnel,
          returns in all cases the description of the tunnel entry. This
          command should be used by tools managing temporary port forwarding.
	  <replaceable>IPv6_remote</replaceable> must be acceptable for IPv6
	  ACLs.
        </para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>

      <varlistentry>
        <term><command>try nat <replaceable>IPv6_remote</replaceable> tcp|udp <replaceable>IPv4_src</replaceable> <replaceable>port_src</replaceable> <replaceable>IPv4_new</replaceable> <replaceable>port_new</replaceable></command></term>
        <listitem>
        <para>
          Create when it doesn't already exist a static binding/NAT
          entry. This command should be used by tools managing
          temporary port forwarding. The tunnel must exist.
        </para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
  </refsect1>

  <refsect1>
    <title>SEE ALSO</title>
    <para>
    <citerefentry>
      <refentrytitle>aftr</refentrytitle>
      <manvolnum>8</manvolnum>
    </citerefentry>,
    <citerefentry>
      <refentrytitle>aftr.commands</refentrytitle>
      <manvolnum>5</manvolnum>
    </citerefentry>
    </para>
  </refsect1>

  <refsect1>
    <title>AUTHOR</title>
    <para><corpauthor>Internet Systems Consortium</corpauthor></para>
  </refsect1>

</refentry>
